docs: migrate 'debug a snap' (#5373)
canonical/snapcraft: docs/how-to/debug/debug-a-snap.rst

Debug a snap
============

The execution and internals of a snap are complex, making debugging as much an art as a
craft. This page contains general advice, methods, and strategies for diagnosing and
remedying a snap that has problems building or running properly.

.. important::

    The content on this page is a work in progress. Some guidance might be out-of-date
    across different cores and versions of Snapcraft.

Where to look for errors
------------------------

Here are the common sources of errors when crafting a snap.

Build environment
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Snaps are built to run on top of a :ref:`base snap <explanation-bases>` runtime. This

> base is provided by an automatically-installed snap. Currently the most widely used core
> image is based on Ubuntu 22.04 LTS.

Reviewer: Future-proof for a few more years?

```suggestion
base is provided by an automatically-installed snap. Currently the most widely used core
images are based on Ubuntu 22.04 LTS and Ubuntu 24.04 LTS.
```

Missing libraries
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Most apps need additional libraries added to the snap in order to function correctly. As
the developer of the app, you're best placed to know which libraries the snap needs
staged during build.

Sometimes when a snap is initially built, libraries are missing because they weren't
explicitly specified by the developer. There's a couple of ways to bundle required
libraries in a snap, both of which are covered below, but more details can be found in
`Build and staging dependencies
<https://snapcraft.io/docs/build-and-staging-dependencies>`_.

Staged packages
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

It's common to bundle required libraries in snaps with the ``stage-packages`` key in the
project file. These are standard package names from the Ubuntu repository used by the
base snap. To find packages in the Ubuntu archive, search for them in the `Ubuntu
Archive <https://packages.ubuntu.com>`_. Make sure to choose the Ubuntu version used by
your base snap when searching.

> Don't include glibc or libc6 in your list of staged packages. Doing so is unnecessary as

Reviewer 2: > glibc or libc6

Could these be replaced with something like "the GNU C Library"?

Author: I think the intent here was to identify specific packages. @mr-cal Could we make this more general?

Reviewer: I think the specific package names are appropriate here because those package names are precisely what shouldn't be added to `stage-packages`

the base snap contains those libraries already, and bundling them into your snap can
cause unexpected behaviour.

Individual libraries
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Some app developers already have vendored libraries that they've tested well with their
> app. Such libraries can be bundled with the snap. Place the libraries in the snap's
> ``/lib`` directory. The directory is added to the ``LD_LIBRARY_PATH`` and as such should
> be found successfully by your app when the snap is installed on a device.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some app developers already have vendored libraries that they've tested with their
app. Such libraries can be bundled with the snap by placing the libraries in the snap's
``/lib`` directory. The directory is added to the ``LD_LIBRARY_PATH`` and should
be found successfully by your app when the snap is installed on a device.
```

Author: 73081d4

until the prime step:

.. terminal::

    Failed to generate snap metadata: 'adopt-info' refers to part 'mypart', but that
    part is lacking the 'parse-info' property.

To resolve this particular missing key, make sure your part includes ``parse-info`` or
runs a command to define the version details, such as ``craftctl set-version``.

For more information on the keys affected by this error, see :ref:`Configure package
information <how-to-configure-package-information-from-appstream>`.

Build step
~~~~~~~~~~

Errors in this step are only generated by projects building their own binaries from
source code.

Any issues that occur are likely to be similar to those associated with compiling the
project outside of Snapcraft, and it can help to first build manually, or be familiar
with the part that's failing to build, before updating your snap.

As an example:

.. terminal::

    Package ncursesw was not found in the pkg-config search path.
    Perhaps you should add the directory containing 'ncursesw.pc'
    to the PKG_CONFIG_PATH environment variable
    No package 'ncursesw' found
    pkg-config: exit status 1

> This example is easily rectified by adding libncursesw5-dev to the

Reviewer 2: > libncursew5-dev

Should this use inline code formatting? Asking for future reference.

Author: I haven't been able to find a good justification to wrap package names in code. Subject to change if a reason or case comes along in the future.
